Typography in ten minutes:

1.The typographic quality of your document is determined largely by how the body
  text looks. Why? Because there’s more body text than anything else. So start
  every project by making the body text look good. Then worry about the rest.

  In turn, the appearance of the body text is determined primarily by these four
  typographic choices:

2.Point size is how big the font is. In print, the most comfortable range for
  body text is 10–12 point. On the web, 15–25 pixels. Not every font appears
  equally large at a given point size, so be prepared to adjust as needed.

3.Line spacing is the vertical distance between lines. It should be 120–145% of
  the point size. In word processors, use the “Exact” line-spacing option to
  achieve this. The default single-line option is too tight; the 1½-line option is
  too loose. In CSS, use the line-height property (preferably with a unitless
  value, so 130% would become 1.3).

4.Line Length is the horizontal width of the text block. Line length should be
  an average of 45–90 characters per line (use your word-count function) or 2–3
  lowercase alphabets, like so:

  abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzabcd

  In a printed document, this usually means page margins larger than one inch (a
  typewriter habit). On a web page, it usually means preventing the text from
  flowing to the edges of the browser window.

5.And finally, font choice. The fastest, easiest, and most visible improvement
  you can make to your typography is to ignore the fonts already loaded on your
  computer (known as system fonts) and the free fonts that inundate the internet.
  Instead, buy a professional font (like those found in font recommendations). A
  professional font gives you the benefit of a professional designer’s skills
  without having to hire one.

  If that’s impossible, you can still make good typography with system fonts. But
  choose wisely. And never choose Times New Roman or Arial, as those fonts are
  favored only by the apathetic and sloppy. Not by typographers. Not by you.

Summary of key rules:

1.The four most important typographic considerations for body text are point
  size, line spacing, line length, and font (see font recommendations), because
  those choices determine how the body text looks.

2.Point size should be 10–12 points in printed documents, 15-25 pixels on the
  web.

3.Line spacing should be 120–145% of the point size.

4.The average line length should be 45–90 characters (including spaces).

5.The easiest and most visible improvement you can make to your typography is to
  use a professional font, like those found in font recommendations.

6.Avoid goofy fonts, monospaced fonts, most free fonts, and system
  fonts—especially Times New Roman and Arial.

7.Use curly quotation marks, not straight ones (see straight and curly quotes).

8.Use bold or italic as little as possible, and not together.

9.Never underline, except perhaps for web links.

10.All caps are fine for less than one line of text.

11.Use centered text sparingly.

12.Put only one space between sentences.

13.Don’t use multiple word spaces or other white-space characters in a row.

14.If you don’t have real small caps, don’t use them at all.

15.Use 5–12% extra letterspacing with all caps and small caps.

16.Kerning should always be turned on.

17.Use first-line indents that are one to four times the point size of the text,
   or use 4–10 points of space between paragraphs. Don’t use both.

18.Always use hyphenation with justified text.

19.Don’t confuse hyphens and dashes, and don’t use multiple hyphens as a dash.

20.Use ampersands sparingly, unless included in a proper name.

21.Use proper trademark and copyright symbols—not alphabetic approximations.

22.In a document longer than three pages, one exclamation point is plenty (see
   question marks and exclamation points).

23.Put a nonbreaking space after paragraph and section marks.

24.Make ellipses using the proper character, not periods and spaces.

25.Apostrophes point downward.

26.Make sure foot and inch marks are straight, not curly.
